docs: Clarify sharded controller metrics (#27979)
argoproj/argo-cd: docs/operator-manual/metrics.md

Metrics about applications. Scraped at the `argocd-metrics:8082/metrics` endpoint.

Single-replica `application-controller` installs can continue scraping `argocd-metrics:8082/metrics`.

> For sharded or multi-replica `application-controller` deployments, scrape every controller pod or endpoint. Scraping the `argocd-metrics` ClusterIP or service DNS name from a static config may hit only one backend and miss metrics from other shards. See [High Availability](./high_availability.md#argocd-application-controller) for controller sharding configuration.

Reviewer: Thanks for picking this up. Generally LGTM, just suggesting a couple of wording fixes for clarity to avoid being misleading.

deployments works as a general word, but it can be confused with a k8s workload `Deployment`. The `application-controller` is actually a `StatefulSet`, how about using that instead?

For the controller, bumping `StatefulSet` replicas alone does not enable sharding, since docs instruct setting both the `replica` count and `ARGOCD_CONTROLLER_REPLICAS` together. Could we narrow the wording to that case and tie it to the env var?

```suggestion
For a sharded `application-controller` `StatefulSet` (multiple replicas with `ARGOCD_CONTROLLER_REPLICAS` set), scrape every controller pod or endpoint. Scraping the `argocd-metrics` ClusterIP or service DNS name from a static config may hit only one backend and miss metrics from other shards. See [High Availability](./high_availability.md#argocd-application-controller) for controller sharding configuration.
```

Reviewer 2: The application controller can also be a [deployment ](https://argo-cd.readthedocs.io/en/stable/operator-manual/dynamic-cluster-distribution/#enabling-dynamic-distribution-of-clusters). 

But a `ServiceMonitor` uses all the `Endpoints` and `EndpointSlice` and scrapes every pod. I don't think this configuration is required. 

https://prometheus-operator.dev/docs/developer/getting-started/#using-servicemonitors

The `ServiceMonitor` could probably be configured better but it should work.

Reviewer: Thanks for catching this. I haven’t actually tried the Deployment-based setup, does it expose shard-local metrics in the same way (one shard per pod)?

And agreed, if this block ends up ambiguous (and contradicting the ServiceMonitor note below), dropping it and keeping only the block below sounds cleaner to me.

Reviewer 2: > Thanks for catching this. I haven’t actually tried the Deployment-based setup, does it expose shard-local metrics in the same way (one shard per pod)?

The pods are running the same binary and exposing the same metrics endpoint. The service and/or pod labels maybe different. 

Yea look [here](https://github.com/argoproj/argo-cd/blob/master/manifests/base/application-controller-deployment/argocd-application-controller-service.yaml) the service isn't `argocd-metrics` which is what the service monitor uses. 

So, I think we should update dynamic distribution docs assuming that is what @mark-liu is using.

If using Prometheus Operator, the following ServiceMonitor example manifests can be used.
Add a namespace where Argo CD is installed and change `metadata.labels.release` to the name of label selected by your Prometheus.

> `ServiceMonitor` endpoint discovery scrapes all matching Service endpoints, so the `argocd-metrics` example collects metrics from every `application-controller` pod when the Service selector targets all controller replicas. For non-Operator scrapers (e.g. Telegraf, Grafana Agent), use Kubernetes pod or endpoint discovery rather than a ClusterIP target.

Reviewer 2: I agree with this but isn't it contradicting what is above?
